# Lambda Expressions


### Definition and Pseudo Code

Lambda expressions are unnamed functions that are written _inline_ with the rest of your code.

* Also known as anonymous functions.
* Useful for quick functions, where it may be cumbersome to implement a full function or class object.
* Typically used where a _function pointer_ could be used.

```cpp
Syntax: [capture list] (argument list){
    //code
}
```

---

### Creating a Lambda

* Lambdas are created with **\[\]**, the capture _clause_.
* This allows the _lambda function_ to capture a variable from the surrounding _scope_.
* After the _capture clause_ comes the _argument list_.
* This example does not capture a variable.
* How is this _lambda expression_ being used?
* Notice how this function is built inside of main?

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    auto fn1 = [](int x)
    {
        return x % 42;
    };

    if (fn1(62) == 20)
    {
        std::cout << "Test: TRUE";
    }
    else
    {
        std::cout << "Test: FALSE";
    }

    return 0;
}
```

---

### "Capturing" Variables

* Capturing variables can be done using the capture list... that's what's within the capture clause **\[\]**
* This defines what variables are available to the lambda from outside of the lambda and how. 

#### Capture by Value

* Inside the _capture list, \_we can use the = symbol to capture all variables from \_scope by value \(if they are used in the lambda\)._
* Variables captured with **=** are captured by _value._
* Multiple captures can be made by separating the values with **,**
* Using **\[=\]** alone will capture all variables from scope. This is not recommended.
* To capture specific variables by value, pass them in without the **=**. ex: \[var1, var2\]

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    auto divisor = 42;
    auto fn2 = [divisor](int x){
        return x % divisor;
    };
    divisor = 1; //Does this line matter?

    //REQUIRE(fn2(62) == 20);
    if (fn2(62) == 20)
    {
        std::cout << "TEST: TRUE";
    }
    else
    {
        std::cout << "TEST: FALSE";
    }

    return 0;
}
```

#### Capture by Reference

* Lambdas can also capture values by **reference** with the **&** symbol.
* Like with capturing values, you can also use **\[&\]** to capture all scoped references, although this is not recommended.
* Unlike capturing by value, you will need to include **&** for any referenced captures. ex: \[&var1, &var2\]
* You can mix and match too! ex: \[var1, &var2\]
* Look at the example, and think about the result of the test case at the end. \(Use debugger if you have to\)

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    auto divisor = 42;
    auto fn2 = [&divisor](int x) {
        return x % divisor;
    };
    divisor = 62; //Does this line matter?

    if (fn2(62) == 0)
    {
        std::cout << "TEST: TRUE";
    }
    else
    {
        std::cout << "TEST: FALSE";
    }

    return 0;
}
```

---



