# References

---

#### Lets take a look at references...

A reference can be thought of as a constant pointer \(not to be confused with a pointer to a constant value or constant reference (will be going over in a second)!\) with automatic indirection, i.e. the compiler will apply the **\*** operator for you. The caller just passes the object, giving us a layer of transparency. (Again, don't worry too much about this yet. These are OOP concepts.)

References are pointers that cannot be null; meaning the called function does not have to check for null values. References also allow you to interact with the variable without having to use the dereference operator.

A reference variable is an alias, that is, another name for an already existing variable. A reference, like a pointer is also implemented by storing the address of an object.

* References can be assigned only once
* References will always refer to an initialized object
* You cannot obtain the address of a reference
* There is no such thing as reference arithmetic
* References are easier to use, giving you less chances of bugs

```cpp
struct Point{
    int x, y;
};

voidset_to_origin(Point &point){
    point.x = 0;
    point.y = 0;
}
…
```

---

#### How does it compare to pointers?

A pointer is a variable that holds the memory address of another variable. A pointer needs to be dereferenced with **\*** operator to access the memory location it points to.

* Pointers can be reassigned any number of times
* Pointers can point to nothing
* You can obtain the address of a pointer
* Pointer arithmetic is a real thing

```cpp
struct Point{
    int x, y;
};

void set_to_origin(Point *point){
    point->x = 0;
    point->y = 0;
}
…
```

---

## Function Design Guidelines

* Pass by **const reference** when you want to pass in an argument that will not be modified.
* Pass by **reference** when you want to pass an argument that can be modified
* Pass by value when you want a copy that you can modify.
* Never use raw pointers unless:
    * We are using C-Functions
    * You want to ability to use 0 value or NULL arguments. 

###### Note: consider whether you must operate on **const **arguments e.g. from an external API


## Proceed to lab 1A