# New to C++

---

#### **We now have 'auto'**

###### Usage

> For variables, specifies that the type of the variable that is being declared will be automatically deduced from its initializer. For functions, specifies that the return type is a trailing return type or will be deduced from its return statements \(since C++14\) for non-type template parameters, specifies that the type will be deduced from the argument \(since C++17\).[^1]

The **auto **specifier is only allowed for objects declared at block scope \(except function parameter lists\). It indicates automatic storage duration and no linkage, which are the defaults for these kinds of declarations.

* **auto **lets us specify it once.
* variables declared auto will have the compiler try to deduce what the appropriate data type will be
* As of C++14, auto can also be used as a function return type. This is useful for working with templates, which we cover later.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
    auto x = 42.0L;

    //code stuffs

    return (0);
}
```

**auto **can save your life! Or at least your execution:

```cpp
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
    unsigned int bad = -42; // Auto would save us here

    //code stuffs

    return (0);
}
```

---

#### decltype

* **decltype **is useful for trying to deduce a data type, but you do not have an initializer.
* **decltype** extracts the type from another variable.
* Both **auto **and **decltype** are very powerful.

```cpp
int foo = 0;
decltype(foo) bar; //bar now has the same type as foo
```

Decltype and auto ultimately allows devs to focus on logic, rather than mundane tasks.

---

#### Runtime Sized Arrays

* New feature to C++14
* Arrays can be sized at runtime.
* Very similar to C99's VLAs except for a few exceptions which can be found [here](https://blog.smartbear.com/development/a-glimpse-into-c14/). 

```cpp
void fun(int i)
{
    int array[i];
}
```

---

#### Functions

You can still use C-style functions:

```cpp
int do_stuff(int in_param, char[] array, double *out_param)
```

Major improvements:

* Passing with **references**.
* Passing **structs/classes** by value.
* **const **parameters.

---

#### Default Argument Values

You can make arguments optional by giving them default values:

```cpp
double function_with_default(double x=100)
{
    return x;
}

auto a = function_with_default();         // What is returned?
auto b = function_with_default(42);       // What is returned?
```

---

#### const

New keyword, means you wont change the value of the **const **variable.

It is a **const-**ant.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    const auto x = 100;
    x = 200;     //Does not compile
    //code stuffs
    return (0);
}
```

**const** variables cannot be modified. This includes **const** pointers.

**const int \* **_ptr_** **- a pointer that points to constant data.

* You can modify the pointer itself.. but not the object "data" pointed to by the ptr

**int\* const** _ptr_- a pointer that cannot be reassigned.

* You cannot modify the pointer itself... but you can modify the object "data" pointed to by the ptr

**const int\* const** - a pointer that is constant, that points to data that is constant.

* You cannot modify the pointer nor the object "data" the pointer points to. 

```cpp
const int a = 0xDEADBEEF;
const int b = 0xCAFEF00D;
int* const ptr1 = &a;    //ERROR
const int* ptr2 = &a;
ptr2 = &b;
const int* const ptr3 = &a;
ptr3 = &b    //ERROR
```

---

[^1]: [CPP Source](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/auto)

